this article is about the means of transportation. for other uses, see vehicle (disambiguation).
cars, motorcycles, and a bus on display in thame, england in 2009
a train passing a group of boats near the river dart, england in 2016
bicycles, electric bicycles, and scooters in yangzhou, china in 2008
a space shuttle and a 747 above california, united states in 1977

a vehicle (from latin vehiculum) is a machine designed for self-propulsion, usually to transport people, cargo, or both. the term "vehicle" typically refers to land vehicles such as human-powered vehicles (e.g. bicycles, tricycles, velomobiles), animal-powered transports (e.g. horse-drawn carriages/wagons, ox carts, dog sleds), motor vehicles (e.g. motorcycles, cars, trucks, buses, mobility scooters) and railed vehicles (trains, trams and monorails), but more broadly also includes cable transport (cable cars and elevators), watercraft (ships, boats and underwater vehicles), amphibious vehicles (e.g. screw-propelled vehicles, hovercraft, seaplanes), aircraft (airplanes, helicopters, gliders and aerostats) and space vehicles (spacecraft, spaceplanes and launch vehicles).

this article primarily concerns the more ubiquitous land vehicles, which can be broadly classified by the type of contact interface with the ground: wheels, tracks, rails or skis, as well as the non-contact technologies such as maglev. iso 3833-1977 is the international standard for road vehicle types, terms and definitions.

history

it is estimated by historians that boats have been used since prehistory; rock paintings depicting boats, dated from around 50,000 to 15,000 bc, were found in australia. the oldest boats found by archaeological excavation are logboats, with the oldest logboat found, the pesse canoe found in a bog in the netherlands, being carbon dated to 8040–7510 bc, making it 9,500–10,000 years old. a 7,000 year-old seagoing boat made from reeds and tar has been found in kuwait. boats were used between 4000–3000 bc in sumer, ancient egypt and in the indian ocean.

there is evidence of camel pulled wheeled vehicles about 4000–3000 bc. the earliest evidence of a wagonway, a predecessor of the railway, found so far was the 6 to 8.5 km (4 to 5 mi) long diolkos wagonway, which transported boats across the isthmus of corinth in greece since around 600 bc. wheeled vehicles pulled by men and animals ran in grooves in limestone, which provided the track element, preventing the wagons from leaving the intended route.

in 200 ce, ma jun built a south-pointing chariot, a vehicle with an early form of guidance system. the stagecoach, a four-wheeled vehicle drawn by horses, originated in 13th century england.

railways began reappearing in europe after the dark ages. the earliest known record of a railway in europe from this period is a stained-glass window in the minster of freiburg im breisgau dating from around 1350. in 1515, cardinal matthäus lang wrote a description of the reisszug, a funicular railway at the hohensalzburg fortress in austria. the line originally used wooden rails and a hemp haulage rope and was operated by human or animal power, through a treadwheel. 1769: nicolas-joseph cugnot is often credited with building the first self-propelled mechanical vehicle or automobile in 1769.

in russia, in the 1780s, ivan kulibin developed a human-pedalled, three-wheeled carriage with modern features such as a flywheel, brake, gear box and bearings; however, it was not developed further.

in 1783, the montgolfier brothers developed the first balloon vehicle.